patch/guides (#270)
nodejs/i18n: guides/ROLES.md

# Roles

Localization process based on two environments – GitHub and Crowdin. Both of them have roles management, and Node.js i18n group standardized it into one system.

## Crowdin

From [official docs](https://support.crowdin.com/modifying-project-participants-roles/#project-roles) of Crowdin, project members hierarchy looks like:

1. Owner – a person who created a project. Project ownership can not be changed
2. Manager – has the same rights as a project owner except project deleting
3. Proofreader – does not have access to project settings, can translate and approve strings. Also, proofreader can accept/discard join requests and promote to proofreader or block translators
4. Translator – can translate strings and vote for suggestions
5. Blocked – does not have access to the project

### Owner

All Node.js Crowdin projects created by [Node.js Crowdin Bot](https://github.com/nodejs-crowdin), and this account is actual owner.

### Manager

> This member is active contributor with big experience in Node.js localization process and Crowdin platform. Each of Node.js Crowdin projects has their managers to handle general issues:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This member is an active contributor with extensive experience in the Node.js localization process and Crowdin platform. Each Node.js Crowdin project has managers to handle general issues:
```

- change role of members (translator/proofreader/manager)
- add/remove language
- problems with GitHub<--->Crowdin integration/sync

To become a manager of project, please create a new issue with request in base repository ([see table](./GETTING_STARTED.md/#i18n-projects)).

### Proofreader

> This role it's kind of translators team lead, who have enough experience to approve/decline translations. One member can be a proofreader just for one language without exceptions for multi language speakers, because it helps to focus on details. Proofreader can translate content, but main goal is to validate incoming content.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion:
`This role is kind of a translators team lead, who has enough experience to approve/decline translations.`

> NOTE: Not approved translation never go live, that's why we recommend for proofreaders to focus on validation process instead of translating

To become a proofreader of locale, please create a new issue with request in base repository of project ([see table](./GETTING_STARTED.md/#i18n-projects)). To be sure in your experience, we require translate at least 1000 strings in your locale as translator, and attach proofs to issue.

### Translator

> Main player in localization process, who actually make translation.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion:
`Main player in localization process, the ony who actually translates.`

> To become a translator just complete with our guidelines and go ahead! We really appreciate your volunteering.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion:
`To become a translator, just read our guidelines and go ahead!`

## GitHub

From GitHub side we have just two type of roles:

> - maintainer - admin of some l10n team/repository
> - contributor - part of some l10n team/repository

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Maintainer - admin of some l10n team/repository
- Contributor - part of some l10n team/repository
```

> To avoid any confusion with "team" and "repository" in context of our process, here is quick description:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid any confusion with "team" and "repository" in context of our process, here is a quick description:
```

- Teams are groups of organization members that reflect your company or group's structure with cascading access permissions and mentions. Used for group mentions like `@nodejs/nodejs-es` in issues/PRs, or for target announcements.
- l10n repository is basement for translators to discuss language team specific questions. For example, glossary, priorities, guidelines etc. Here translators can speak in their native language.

> NOTE: More details about l10n team/repositories you can find in [Teams guide](./TEAMS.md)

## Maintainer

> User who manage l10n team issues/discussions, helps with global localization process updates under controlled repository. Has "write" access to l10n repository.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion:
`User who manages`
